Basic pipeline (#14)
membraneframework/membrane_tutorials: basic_pipeline/6_OrderingBuffer.md

+ `^` describes the beginning of the input
+ `\[` stands for the opening square bracket ('[') at the beginning is required to escape the char since the plain '[' has a special meaning in the regex syntax
+ `seq` is a sequence of 's', 'e', 'q' characters (we need to adjust our regex description to match the header of the packet)
+ `\:` stands for the ':' character (we also need to escape that character since it is meaningful in the regex's syntax)
+ `(?<seq_id>\d+)` allows us to define a named capture - later one, once we use the `Regex.named_captures/2`, we will retrieve the map with 'seq_id' key and the corresponding value equal to the string described by the `\d+` 'partial' regex (which means - one or more occurrences of a decimal). Generally speaking, a named capture can be specified with the following structure: `(?<key>regex)` where `regex` is a regex description.
+ `\]` is the escaped closing square bracket character
+ `(?<data>.*)` is a named capture description that allows us to get the value of a `.*` regex (any character no or any number of times) under a `data` key.
+ `$` stands for the end of the input

> 

Reviewer: you can remove it

Author: I will put it as a tip
done

We also get the sequence id of the first element in the updated `ordered_packets` list.

Here comes the rest of the `handle_process/4` definition:
```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
  ...
  def handle_process(:input, buffer, _context, state) do
  ...
    if state.last_processed_seq_id + 1 == last_seq_id do
      {reversed_ready_packets_sequence, ordered_packets} = get_ready_packets_sequence(ordered_packets, [])
      [{last_processed_seq_id, _} | _] = reversed_ready_packets_sequence

      state = %{
        state
        | ordered_packets: ordered_packets,
          last_processed_seq_id: last_processed_seq_id
      }
      buffers = Enum.reverse(reversed_ready_packets_sequence) |> Enum.map(fn {_seq_id, data} -> data end)

      {{:ok, buffer: {:output, buffers}}, state}
    else
      {{:ok, redemand: :output}, state}
    end
  end
  ...
end
```

> We need to distinguish between two situations: the currently processed packet can have a sequence id which is subsequent to the sequence id of the last processed packet or there might be some packets not yet delivered to us, with sequence ids in between the last processed sequence id and the sequence id of a currently processed packet. In case the second situation occurs, we should store the packet and wait for the next packets to arrive.

Reviewer: last processed packet collides with handle_process, packets that end up in the list of ordered packets have also been processed in terms of handle_process right? Maybe it should be the last sent packet or sth like this.

Author: I have renamed it both in the code and in the text to last sent packet / last sent packet sequence id

Author: done

In this chapter we will deal with the next element in our pipeline - the Ordering Buffer.
As stated in the [chapter about the system architecture](2_SystemArchitecture.md), this element is responsible for ordering the incoming packets, based on their sequence id.

> Ordering Buffer will be the first filter we gonna implement - therefore we need to specify both the input and the output pads:

Author: done

```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
  use Membrane.Filter

  def_input_pad(:input, demand_unit: :buffers, caps: {Basic.Formats.Packet, type: :custom_packets})

  def_output_pad(:output, caps: {Basic.Formats.Packet, type: :custom_packets})
  ...
end
```

Note the caps specification definition there - we expect `Basic.Formats.Packet` of type `:custom_packets` to be sent on the input pad, and the same type of packets to be sent through the output pad.
In the next step let's specify how we want the state of our element to look like:
```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
  ...
  @impl true
  def handle_init(_options) do
    {:ok,
      %{
      ordered_packets: [],
      last_processed_seq_id: 0
      }
    }
  end
  ...
end
```

We will need to hold a list of ordered packets, as well as a sequence id of the packet, which most recently was sent through the output pad (we need to know if there are some packets missing between the last processed packet and the first packet in our ordered list).

> Handling demand is quite straightforward:

Author: done

```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
 ...
 @impl true
 def handle_demand(_ref, size, _unit, _ctx, state) do
  {{:ok, demand: {Pad.ref(:input), size}}, state}
 end
 ...
end
```

We simply send the `:demand` on the `:input` pad once we receive a demand on the `:output` pad. One packet on input corresponds to one packet on output so for each 1 unit of demand we send 1 unit on demand to the `:input` pad.

> Now we can go to the main part of the Ordering Buffer implementation - the `handle_process/4` callback:

Author: done

```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
  ...
  @impl true
  def handle_process(:input, buffer, _context, state) do
    packet = unzip_packet(buffer.payload)
    ordered_packets = [packet | state.ordered_packets] |> Enum.sort()

>     state = Map.put(state, :ordered_packets, ordered_packets)

Author: done

However, in the first situation, we need to get the ready packet's sequence - that means, a consistent batch of packets from the `:ordered_packets`. This can be done in the following way:
```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex
defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
  ...
  defp get_ready_packets_sequence([], acc) do
    acc
  end

  defp get_ready_packets_sequence(
    [{first_id, _first_data} = first_seq | [{second_id, second_data} | rest]], acc)
  when first_id + 1 == second_id do
    get_ready_packets_sequence([{second_id, second_data} | rest], [first_seq | acc])
  end

  defp get_ready_packets_sequence([first_seq | _rest], acc) do
    [first_seq | acc]
  end 
end
```

Note the order of the definitions, since we are taking advantage of the pattern matching mechanism!

> The algorithm implemented in the snippet above is really simple - we are recursively taking the next packet out of the `:ordered_packets` buffer, up until a moment that the buffer is empty or there is a missing packet (`first_id + 1 == second_id`) between the last taken packet and the next packet in the buffer.

Author: done

In this chapter we will deal with the next element in our pipeline - the Ordering Buffer.
As stated in the [chapter about the system architecture](2_SystemArchitecture.md), this element is responsible for ordering the incoming packets, based on their sequence id.
Ordering Buffer will be the first filter we gonna implement - therefore we need to specify both the input and the output pads:
```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
  use Membrane.Filter

  def_input_pad(:input, demand_unit: :buffers, caps: {Basic.Formats.Packet, type: :custom_packets})

  def_output_pad(:output, caps: {Basic.Formats.Packet, type: :custom_packets})
  ...
end
```

Note the caps specification definition there - we expect `Basic.Formats.Packet` of type `:custom_packets` to be sent on the input pad, and the same type of packets to be sent through the output pad.

> In the next step let's specify how to we want the state of our element to look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next step let's specify how we want the state of our element to look like:
```

Author: done

```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
  ...
  @impl true
  def handle_init(_options) do
    {:ok,
      %{
      ordered_packets: [],
      last_processed_seq_id: 0
      }
    }
  end
  ...
end
```

> We will need to hold a list of ordered packets, as well as a sequence id of the packets, which most recently was sent through the output pad (we need to know if there are some packets missing between the last processed packet and the first packet in our ordered list).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will need to hold a list of ordered packets, as well as a sequence id of the packet, which most recently was sent through the output pad (we need to know if there are some packets missing between the last processed packet and the first packet in our ordered list).
```

Author: done

Handling demand is quite straightforward:
```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
 ...
 @impl true
 def handle_demand(_ref, size, _unit, _ctx, state) do
  {{:ok, demand: {Pad.ref(:input), size}}, state}
 end
 ...
end
```

> We simply specify the `:demand` action on the `:input` pad once we receive a demand on the `:output` pad.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We simply send the `:demand` on the `:input` pad once we receive a demand on the `:output` pad. Packets are not aggregated in any way so for each 1 unit of demand we send 1 unit on demand to the `:input` pad.
```

Author: done

> We simply send the `:demand` on the `:input` pad once we receive a demand on the `:output` pad. Packets are not aggregated in any way so for each 1 unit of demand we send 1 unit on demand to the `:input` pad.

Author: done

Now we can go to the main part of the Ordering Buffer implementation - the `handle_process/4` callback:
```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
  ...
  @impl true
  def handle_process(:input, buffer, _context, state) do

>     packet = unzip_packet(buffer.payload)

Author: done, both here and in the template repo

  ordered_packets = [packet | state.ordered_packets] |> Enum.sort()
  state = Map.put(state, :ordered_packets, ordered_packets)

>   {last_seq_id, _} = Enum.at(ordered_packets, 0)

Reviewer: indents

Author: done

  ...
  end

  defp unzip_packet(packet) do
  regex = ~r/^\[seq\:(?<seq_id>\d+)\](?<data>.*)$/
  %{"data" => data, "seq_id" => seq_id} = Regex.named_captures(regex, packet)

>   {String.to_integer(seq_id), data}

Reviewer: indents

Author: done

+ `seq` is a sequence of 's', 'e', 'q' characters (we need to adjust our regex description to match the header of the packet)
+ `\:` stands for the ':' character (we also need to escape that character since it is meaningful in the regex's syntax)
+ `(?<seq_id>\d+)` allows us to define a named capture - later one, once we use the `Regex.named_captures/2`, we will retrieve the map with 'seq_id' key and the corresponding value equal to the string described by the `\d+` 'partial' regex (which means - one or more occurrences of a decimal). Generally speaking, a named capture can be specified with the following structure: `(?<key>regex)` where `regex` is a regex description.
+ `\]` is the escaped closing square bracket character
+ `(?<data>.*)` is a named capture description that allows us to get the value of a `.*` regex (any character no or any number of times) under a `data` key.
+ `$` stands for the end of the input

The result of `Regex.named_captures/2` applied to that regex description and the exemplary packet should be following:
```Elixir
{"seq_id"=>7, "data"=>"[frameid:2][timestamp:3]data"}

> ```

Author: Hmm, I am just describing our particular regex, not regexes generally. I think it might be worth leaving it that way as the pure regex looks somehow complicated.

Once we unzip the header of the packet in the `handle_process/4` callback, we can put the incoming packet in the `ordered_packets` list and sort that list. Due to the fact, that elements of this list are tuples, whose first element is a sequence id (a value that is unique), the list will be sorted based on the sequence id.
We also get the sequence id of the first element in the updated `ordered_packets` list.

Here comes the rest of the `handle_process/4` definition:
```Elixir
# FILE: lib/elements/OrderingBuffer.ex

defmodule Basic.Elements.OrderingBuffer do
  ...
  def handle_process(:input, buffer, _context, state) do
  ...
    if state.last_processed_seq_id + 1 == last_seq_id do
      reversed_ready_packets_sequence = get_ready_packets_sequence(ordered_packets, [])

>       {last_processed_seq_id, _} = Enum.at(reversed_ready_packets_sequence, 0)

Author: done

      ordered_packets =
      Enum.slice(
      ordered_packets,
      Range.new(length(reversed_ready_packets_sequence), length(ordered_packets))
      )

      state = Map.put(state, :ordered_packets, ordered_packets)
      state = Map.put(state, :last_processed_seq_id, last_processed_seq_id)
      ready_packets_sequence = Enum.reverse(reversed_ready_packets_sequence)
      ready_packets_sequence = Enum.map(ready_packets_sequence, fn {_seq_id, data} -> data end)

>       buffers = ready_packets_sequence |> Enum.map(fn packet -> %Membrane.Buffer{payload: packet} end)

Author: done

      {{:ok, buffer: {:output, buffers}}, state}
    else
      {{:ok, redemand: :output}, state}
    end
  end
  ...
end
```

> We need to distinguish between two situations: the currently processed packet can have a sequence id which is subsequent to the sequence id of the last processed packet (we keep that sequence id in the state of the element) or there might be some packets not yet delivered to us, with sequence ids in between the last processed sequence id and the sequence id of a currently processed packet. In case the second situation occurs, there is nothing more we can do.

Author: indeed, done

end
```

> We simply send the `:demand` on the `:input` pad once we receive a demand on the `:output` pad. One packet on input corresponds to one packet on output so for each 1 unit of demand we send 1 unit on demand to the `:input` pad.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We simply send the `:demand` on the `:input` pad once we receive a demand on the `:output` pad. One packet on input corresponds to one packet on output so for each 1 unit of demand we send 1 unit of demand to the `:input` pad.
```

end
```

> We need to distinguish between two situations: the currently processed packet can have a sequence id which is subsequent to the sequence id of the last processed packet or there might be some packets not yet delivered to us, with sequence ids in between the last processed sequence id and the sequence id of a currently processed packet. In case the second situation occurs, there is nothing more we can do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to distinguish between two situations: the currently processed packet can have a sequence id which is subsequent to the sequence id of the last processed packet or there might be some packets not yet delivered to us, with sequence ids in between the last processed sequence id and the sequence id of a currently processed packet. In case the second situation occurs, we should store the packet and wait for the next packets to arrive.
```
